# Data Types

In C there are 4 basic data types to use and some other derived ones. When
declaring a variable, we need to specify what data type it is.

## int

It's used to store integer values.

```c
int x = 69;
```

> NOTE: Integers will always use 4 bytes / 32 bits of memory. So, the range of
> values it can store is limited to 32 bits of information.

Integer Range: -2<sup>31</sup> to 2<sup>31</sup> - 1

## unsigned int

An unsigned int is also known as a qualifier which modifies the `int` data type
to double the positive range of `int` in expense of not being able to represent
negative numbers.

```c
unsigned int x = 4000000000;
```

Unsigned Integer Range: 0 to 2<sup>31</sup> to 2<sup>31</sup> - 1

## char

It's used to store a single character.

```c
char x = 'X';
```

Characters will always take up 1 byte / 8 bits of memory. Which means the range
of information a `char` can store is limited to 8 bits.

ASCII has mapped a-Z using numbers so we can store them inside a `char`.'A' is
at position `65`, 'a' at position `97` and '0' is at position `48`.

Character Range: -128 to 127

## float

Floats are used to store floating point values also known as _real numbers_.

```c
float x = 3.1416;
```

They always take up 4 bytes / 32 bits of memory. Since it's limited to only 32
bits, it's not precise all the time for floating point values. This is known as
**floating point imprecision**.

## double

Floats are used to store floating point values also known as _real numbers_.

```c
double  x = 3.1416;
```

Here, the difference between a `double` and a `float` is that it uses 8 bytes /
64 bits of memory. So, it's more precise than a `float` but it too is subject
to the **floating point imprecision**. Double in this case means _double
precision_

## void

Void is a `type` but not a `data type`. Functions can have a `void` return type
which means it returns an empty value / doesn't return a value at all.

Functions can have a parameter list of `void` which means it doesn't take any
arguments at all.

In general sense, `void` represents 'nothing'.

# CS50 Library

CS50 has its own C library that introduces a few data types. To add the library
to our program we can do the following.

```c
#include <cs50.h>
```

## bool

Boolean values can be stored inside a `bool` which is `true` or `false`.

```c
bool is_true = true;
```

## string

It's used to store a series of `characters` which is known as a `string`.

```c
string name = 'Your Name';
```

Strings are basically words / collections of characters. It could really be
anything we want.

# Variables

To declare a variable, we declare its data type, and give it a name. It's good
practice to declare variables only when we need them.

```c
int x;
char a;
```

We can also create multiple variables of the same type in the same line.

```c
int x, y, z;
char a, b, c;
```

If a variable is already declared, there's no need to declare it's type again
when setting a new value.

```c
int x; // Declaration
x = 0; // Assignment
```

One way to simplify this is to declare and assign a variable in the same line.
This is called initializing a variable.

```c
int x = 0; // Initialization
```
