# Operators

We can manipulate and work with values of variables in C with a few operators.

## Arithmetic Operators

We can perform arithmetic operations in c with `+`, `-`, `/`, and `*`. There's
also the `%` operator that gives the remainder of the number on the left divided
by the number on the right.

```c
int x = 6;
int y = 9;

int z = x * y; // z -> 15

int a = 5 % 2; // a -> 1
```

Updating a single variable can be done in a shorter syntax in C.

```c
x = 5;

x += 4; // x -> 9
x++; // x -> 10
x--; // x -> 9
```

## Boolean Expressions

Boolean expressions are used for comparing values in C. All boolean expressions
evaluate to either `true` or `false`. These can be used in conditional
statements such as deciding a branch to run or for a loop to continue.

Using the `cs50` library, we can declare booleans with the `bool` data type.

```c
bool a = true;
```

In C, anything **non zero** will evaluate to `true` in a boolean expression and
0 is considered `false`.

> Two main types of boolean expressions are **logical operators** and
> **relational operators**.

## Logical Operators

In C we have logical operators to compare two boolean expressions.

### Logical AND (&&)

Logical AND is true if and only if both operands are true, otherwise it's false.

|   x   |   y   | (x && y) |
| :---: | :---: | :------: |
| true  | true  |   true   |
| true  | false |  false   |
| false | true  |  false   |
| false | false |  false   |

### Logical OR (||)

Logical AND is true if and only if at least one operand is true, otherwise it's
false.

|   x   |   y   | (x \|\| y) |
| :---: | :---: | :--------: |
| true  | true  |    true    |
| true  | false |    true    |
| false | true  |    true    |
| false | false |   false    |

### Logical NOT (!)

Logical NOT inverts the value of it's operand.

|   x   |  !x   |
| :---: | :---: |
| true  | false |
| false | true  |

## Relational Operators

Relational operators defines some relation between two values.

-   `x < y` - True when x is less than y.
-   `x <= y` - True when x is less than or equal to y.
-   `x > y` - True when x is greater than y.
-   `x >= y` - True when x is greater than or equal to y.

Quality can be checked with the `==` and `!=` operators.

-   `x == y` - True when x is equal to y.
-   `x != y` - True when x is not equal to y.
