# Conditionals

Conditional statements are used to execute different code depending on the value
of a variable. It essentially checks if a condition is true or false and then
executes a block of code depending on the result. Conditional expressions are
also known as branches.

How a conditional statement works is as follows:

```c
if (condition)
{
    // code to execute if condition is true
}

if (condition)
{
    // code to execute if condition is true
}
else
{
    // code to execute if condition is false
}


if (condition)
{
    // code to execute if condition is true
}
else if (condition)
{
    // code to execute if condition is true
}
else
{
    // code to execute if condition is false
}
```

Inside the `()` is the condition that is checked. If the condition is true, the
code inside the `{}` is executed. If the condition is false, the code inside
the `{}` is not executed.

Whenever the condition of a conditional statement is true, the code inside the
`{}` is executed and the rest of the code is not executed. These conditional
statements are **mutually exclusive**.

However, it's possible to create conditional statements that are not **mutually
exclusive**.

```c
if (condition)
{
    // code to execute if condition is true
}
if (condition)
{
    // code to execute if condition is true
}
if (condition)
{
    // code to execute if condition is true
}
if (condition)
{
    // code to execute if condition is true
}
else
{
    // code to execute if condition is false
}
```

The code inside the `{}` is executed in the order that the conditional
statements are written. If one of them is `false` or `true`, the code on the
next block will be executed after evaluating the condition.

Except the last two conditionals here are mutually exclusive. If the first
condition is `false`, the code in the else block will run no matter what.

An else block will always bind to its nearest `if` block.

## Switch Statement

Instead of chaining multiple `if` blocks, a `switch` statement can be used to
execute different code depending on a condition.

C's switch statement is a conditional statement that permits enumeration of
discrete cases, instead of relying on boolean expressions.

```c
int x = 0;

switch (x)
{
    case 1:
        printf("One!\n");
        break;
    case 2:
        printf("Two!\n");
        break;
    case 3:
        printf("Three!\n");
        break;
    default:
        printf("Sorry!\n");
        break;
}
```

It's important to add a `break` at the end of a case block. If a `break` is
omitted, the code inside the case block will be executed for every case. Unless
that's the expected behavior, it can be omitted.

```c
int x = 0;

switch (x)
{
    case 5:
        printf("Five!\n");
    case 4:
        printf("Four!\n");
    case 3:
        printf("Three!\n");
    case 2:
        printf("Two!\n");
    case 1:
        printf("One!\n");
    default:
        printf("Blast Off\n");
}
```

This here is an interesting use case for a switch statement without a `break`.
No matter what the value of `x` starts at, the count down will start from that
specific value.

## Ternary Operator

Ternary operators bring the functionality of an if else block to a single line.

```c
int x;

if (condition)
{
    x = 5;
}
else
{
    x = 6;
}
```

A better way to write something like this would be to use the ternary operator.

```c
int x = (condition) ? 5 : 6;
```

Here, if the condition is true, the value of `x` is set to the value on the left
of the `:` and if the condition is false, `x` is set to the value on the right
of the `:`.
