# Lecture 0

Computer science is about problem solving. Problem solving in general is
taking an input / problem and producing an output / solution for it. Solving
problems will sometimes introduce errors otherwise known as bugs.

> Computers tend to speak only one language known as Binary (Bi meaning 2)
> which implies there are only 2 digits that it can use to perform tasks which
> are 0s and 1s. Humans count using the Unary notation with 10 digits /
> decimal system.

## Counting In Binary

    000 - 0
    001 - 1
    010 - 2
    011 - 3
    100 - 4
    101 - 5
    110 - 6
    111 - 7

Computers use Binary system because it's easy to represent either one or the
other with electricity by just turning a transistor on or off. A computer has
many switches or transistors which gets turned on or off to represent the
values 1 or 0 and it can count using patterns of these 0s and 1s.

These 0s and 1s are also called bits as in Binary Digits. Bits are just
exponents of 2 with the right most digit being the exponent of 2 to the power 0.

## Counting In Decimal

**123 = 1 x 100 + 2 x 10 + 3 x 1**

This is the way we count in decimal system where each column is an exponent of
1 0 starting with 0 on the right most column.

# Representing Information In Binary

Information needs to be expressed through binary because 0s and 1s are not the
only things that humans use in their lives. Yet somehow, computers are able to
do much more. That's because there are ways to display other information using
various methods in binary.

## Letters In Binary

Since the computer can only use 0 and 1, it represents alphabets as a specific
pattern of bits or a number. That is, the letter **A** is represented by the set
of bits `01000001`. B is done so by `01000010` and so on.

> This creates a conflict between the _number_ 65 and the _letter_ A as they
> both can be represented by the set of bits `01000001`.

This contradiction is addressed by making the bits context dependent. That is
based on the context or the application, the bits will mean either the _letter_
A or the _number_ 65. That is the reason why various types of file formats
exists to let the computer know how to **interpret** the binary data.

This standardization of mapping letters to numbers was first implemented by
**ASCII** which is the American Standard Code for Information Interchange.

The message 72 73 33 / `1001000 1001001 100001` can be translated as "Hi!"
following the ASCII standard. To get this message, **24** bits of information
had to be sent. Since bits are tiny, it's generally counted in groups of 8 known
as a **byte**, which is 8 bits = 1 byte. So, the message "Hi!" was sent using
3 bytes of data. ASCII was soon replaced by Extended ASCII since there wasn't
enough space for other characters to be represented with just 8 bits.

> You can count from -127 to 127 using 8 bits / 1 byte. 255 without counting
> in the negative and total 256 different possible values.

    1KB = 1000 B
    1MB = 1000 KB
    1GB = 1000 MB
    1TB = 1000 GB
    1PB = 1000 TB
    1EB = 1000 PB

**UNICODE** is a superset of ASCII which uses 8 bits for backwards compatibility
but, it can also use 16 bits to represent 65,536 values or even 32 bits to
represent an even higher value of 4,294,967,295.

> 4,036,991,159 or `11110000 10011111 10011000 10110111` is the UNICODE value
> for the emoji with a medical mask.

Emojis look different on different devices because it's up to the manufacturer
to decide how an emoji should look like. UNICODE defines the characteristic of
the emoji but it's up to the company / developer to decide how to emoji is
going to appear on their device.

Some examples include the hug emoji looking like a wave emoji in some devices,
the gun emoji appearing as a water gun and many more.

## Colors In Binary

Computers display color using RGB values which means, each pixel / dot in the
screen can display a certain amount of red, green and blue to display a wide
range of colors.

72 73 33 / `1001000 1001001 100001` in the context of colors will mean that
amount of red, green and blue and display a shade of yellow.

## Images / Videos In Binary

Computers can display images as a combination of many pixels in a grid. As it
can store the color value of one pixel using 24 bits, it can use several of
them to display an image. Video is just a sequence of images shown at a fast
pace that gives the sense of motion. It's standard to have 24 images / frames
shown per second to express motion and create a video.

> There are codecs and containers for file formats that use math to represent
> the same amount of data but using much smaller number of bits. This is done
> because a video containing 24 images a second would be too large to distribute
> and thus **compression** is used to store them.

Compression can be of lossy (there's loss of information for smaller file sizes)
or lossless (no loss of information but relatively larger file sizes compared
to lossy compression).

## Audio In Binary

Binary can be used to assign a specific pattern of bits to represent a note from
a musical instrument similarly to alphabets and emojis. One format that does
that is called MIDI.

MIDI can represent specific notes, the duration and even volume similarly to
how humans play musical instruments in the real world.

# Problem Solving

INPUT --> ALGORITHM --> OUTPUT

Creating programs is basically writing algorithms. **Algorithm** is a set or
sets of instructions to solve a problem.

## Search Algorithms

Searching through a sorted list can be done with various algorithms / ways. Lets
take the list to be n items long and it takes 1s to iterate over each item.

1. One Item In One Step

    By going through each item one by one, we will eventually get to the item we
    are looking for. This way, the algorithm will go through each item in **n**
    time since we're going over each item every second and if more items are
    added, it's going to take that much more time to find it.

2. Two Item In One Step

    **THIS IS WRONG**

    One way is to look at every second item in the list. We can reduce the time
    in half by doing this, but there's a 50% chance of us skipping over the item
    we're actually looking for and thus this algorithm for finding the item is
    invalid.

    This algorithm will go over all items in **n/2** time as we're halving the
    list in half essentially by going over every two items and it's going to
    take the the same **n/2** time to find the item.

3. Divide In The Middle and Repeat

    Another way of finding the item in an alphabetically sorted list would be to
    got to the center of the list, checking whether the item we're looking for
    is on the right or left half of the list and ignore the other half. Then,
    going to the middle of the half of the side we previously chose, we repeat
    the same process until we are left with just the one item we are looking for
    if that exists in the list.

    Now, this algorithm will find the item in **log2n** time as we're halving
    the size of the list in every step.

> NOTE: The names for the algorithms are not literally as the ones mentioned.

## Pseudo Code

> Pseudo code is not a specific language, it's just a way of expressing yourself
> in human language succinctly correctly toward an end of getting across your
> idea for an algorithm across.

The pseudo code for the 3rd algorithm in searching through a sorted list can
be expressed in pseudo code as follows.

> 1. **Take** the sorted list.
> 2. **Go to** the middle of the list.
> 3. **Check if** it's the item.
> 4. **_If_** _item is found_
>
>     a. **Take** the item
>
> 5. **_Else if_** _item is earlier in the list_
>
>     a. **Open** the middle of left half of the list
>
>     > b. Go back to line 3
>
> 6. **_Else if_** _item is later in the list_
>
>     a. **Open** the middle of right half of the list
>
>     > b. Go back to line 3
>
> 7. **_Else_**
>
>     a. **Quit**

The last statement is there to handle the so called **edge cases** where the
program behaves how you didn't intend it to and to prevent unwanted behavior
the program is quitted.

The **bold** words in the pseudo code are called **functions**.

> Functions are **actions or verbs that solve some smaller problem**. Multiple
> functions are used to solve a larger problem since a function usually solves
> a very small and specific problem.

The **_italicized bold_** words in the pseudo code are called **conditionals**.

> Conditionals are thing that are done conditionally based on the answer to some
> question.

The _italicized_ words are called **Boolean** expressions names after
mathematician with last name Bool.

> Boolean expressions simply have yes or no answers or true or false as values.

The quoted text in the pseudo code are called **loops**.

> Loops are some kind of directive that tells us to do something over and over
> again.

## Real Code

Pseudo code aside, a real program looks something like the following in the
**C** programming language.

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main(void)
{
    printf("Hello, world!\n");
}
```

Something seemingly complex is just used to output 'Hello, world!' by the
program. But, there are other languages that have a much simpler **syntax**
like **Python** where printing the same thing can be done as follows.

```python
print("Hello, world!");
```

# Scratch

Scratch is a web based or a downloadable programming environment that uses some
sort of puzzle piece like blocks that represent programming ideas. By connecting
these pieces and blocks together we can start programming in Scratch.

> NOTE: Since Scratch is a graphical interface for programming, the exact use
> of Scratch can't be expressed through text very effectively. That's why it's
> recommended to just follow the instructions in the original CS50x Lecture 0
> video to get a better understanding of Scratch.
>
> Link To Original Video Of Scratch -
> [CS50x | Lecture 0 | Scratch](https://youtu.be/4zy0z5W0-w4?list=PLhQjrBD2T380Xnv_v683p6UjiKJZe13ki&t=3033)

Scratch's UI has various sections including the blocks, sprites, world, etc.
The Scratch world is divided in 4 quadrants and sprites (characters) can move
using the coordinate system with -240 to 240 in the X axis and 180 to -180 in
the Y axis.

The code blocks are categorized in sections like motion, looks, sound, etc.

## Code Pieces

|  Section  | Description                                                                                              |
| :-------: | :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
|  Motion   | Moves the sprite in different directions both relative to it's position and using the coordinate system. |
|   Looks   | Displays output or change the _look_ of the sprite, backdrop, costume, backdrop, etc.                    |
|   Sound   | Outputs audio and control volume and effects.                                                            |
|  Events   | Listens for events to occur to start a code block.                                                       |
|  Control  | Controls the _flow_ of the program with pauses, loops and exits.                                         |
|  Sensing  | Listens for user interaction.                                                                            |
| Operators | Performs operations like arithmetic as well as evaluate logic.                                           |
| Variables | Holds values in named containers.                                                                        |
| My Blocks | Custom code blocks comprized of multiple code pieces.                                                    |

> WATCH THE ORIGINAL VIDEO.

# Resources

-   [Week 0](https://cs50.harvard.edu/x/2022/weeks/0/)
-   [Lecture 0](https://video.cs50.io/gMfBHd_i4aU?screen=jvsyxRsfYk4&start=3666)
-   [Lecture 0 Notes](https://cs50.harvard.edu/x/2022/notes/0/)
-   [Lecture 0 Slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1X3AMSenwZGSE6WxGpzoALAfMg2hmh1LYIJp3N2a1EYI/edit#slide=id.ged3b88a86b_17_4)
-   [Problem Set 0](https://cs50.harvard.edu/x/2022/psets/0/)
