# Loops

Loops allow us to execute a block of code over and over again.

## While Loop

A while loop is what we call an _infinite loop_. The line of code inside the
`{}` will be executed as long as the condition is `true` repeatedly until and
unless we break out of it (with a `break` statement) or we kill the program.

```c
while (true)
{
    // code to execute
}
```

Instead of just using `true` we can use any condition we want. The following
code will execute the code as long as the condition holds true after each
**iteration**.

```c
while (condition)
{
    // code to execute
}
```

## Do While Loop

A do while loop will first run the code inside the `{}` and then check for the
condition to be true or false. If the condition is true, the code inside the
`{}` will be executed again. If the condition is false, it will stop the loop.

```c
do
{
    // code to execute
}
while (condition);
```

> NOTE: The difference between a `while` and a `do while` loop is that the `do`
> loop will always run at least once.

## For Loop

For loops are used to repeat a block of code a specific number of times.

```c
for (start, condition, increment)
{
    // code to execute
}
```

```c
for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++)
{
    // code to execute
}
```

Here, `i` is the variable that will be incremented each time the loop runs. We
check for a condition to be true or false, and if it is, we execute the code
inside the `{}`. After the block of code is executed, we increment the value of
`i` by 1.

This loop will eventually come to an end as the condition will no longer hold
true once `i` is equal to 10. So, the block of code inside the `{}` will only
execute 10 times.
