# Lecture 1

Unlike the graphical programming interface like Scratch, in most cases it's done
through a text based programming language. For example, the following code is
of an older traditional programming language known as **C**.

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main(void)
{
    printf("Hello, world!\n");
}
```

Code needs to be correct to solve a problem. It also needs to be well designed
for maintainability and efficiency. Styling the code is also important to make
it readable.

So, the overarching goals of code are **correctness**, **design** and **style**.

## Code Editor

Code can't be written in _Rich Text_. It needs to be edited with a plain text
editor or in this case, **Code Editors**. One such editor is VS Code.

## C Code

C code is written in a plain text file with the `.c` extension. After writing a
program in a C file, we need to **compile** the code to run it.

Compiling means to translate one language to machine code in this case. The C
file gets converted to binary that the machine can understand.

Source Code --> Compiler --> Machine Code

C code can be compiled with the command `make <filename.c>`. To run the file,
we can use the command `./<filename.c>`.

After changing the contents of the source code, the file needs to be compiled
again to reflect the changes.

## CLI Basics

General CLI commands to use.

-   List Files - `ls`
-   Change Directory - `cd`
-   Copy - `cp`
-   Move - `mv`
-   Remove File - `rm <filename>`
-   Make Directory - `mkdir`
-   Remove Directory - `rmdir`

In the CLI, `.` refers to the current directory and `..` refers to the parent
directory.

Using the `up arrow` and `down arrow` keys, we can cycle through our command
history that we previously ran.

Pressing `TAB` will autocomplete or show possible options for the command while
typing.

## Functions & Arguments

In Scratch we could use a _say_ function to output the _argument_ that we passed
to it. Similarly to that, we can implement a function in C to output an argument
passed to the say function.

Arguments --> Functions --> Side Effects / Return Value

Outputting something with C can be done as follows.

```c
printf("Hello, world!\n");
```

Functions can return a value instead of producing side effects (outputting
something). It can be stored in a variable that we can use later.

> NOTE: This is done with the cs50 C library. `get_string()` is not an builtin
> C function. To properly use the function, refer to the later description of
> the module.

```c
string answer = get_string("What's your name? ");
```

The `=` here is the **assignment operator** and it stores the value of what's in
the right to the variable that's in the left. It's read from right to left.

We can now output the value of answer to the _console_ as follows.

```c
printf("Hello, %s.\n");
```

Now, to run the program we need to include wit CS50 library as follows at the
top of the file.

```c
#include <cs50.h>
```

> NOTE: To install the CS50 library, visit the [guide](https://cs50.readthedocs.io/libraries/cs50/c/).

Here, importing the `cs50.h` library gave us access to the function
`get_string()` and the data type `string`. Also, `printf` can't be used without
a library too called `stdio.h` which needs to be included too.

Ultimately, the program should look something like as follows.

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <cs50.h>

int main(void)
{
    string answer = get_string("What's your name? ");
    printf("Hello, %s.\n", answer);
}
```

The `printf` function is taking in 2 arguments which are the `string` and the
variable `answer`.

The `%s` is a placeholder for C to plug in a `string` value. The value of the
variable `answer` is getting replaced with the `%s` placeholder. Instead of the
variable, we could also directly put a string that's going to get placed inside
the string.

```c
printf("Hello, %s.\n", "Your Name");
```

We can take it a step further and declare replace the variable with the
`get_string()` function itself.

```c
printf("Hello, %s.\n", get_string("What's your name? "));
```

The later is _poorly_ designed as we can't reuse the name later in the program.
Although, it's subjective in this case as we're using this value only once.

Here, the two functions `get_string()` and `printf()` produce a return value and
a side effect respectively. The `get_string` function returns the value of the
name of the user and the `printf` function uses that value to produce a side
effect / output to the console the name of the person with a greeting.

The `main()` function is the heart of a C program. That's the function that gets
called whenever a program is ran.

```c
int main(void)
{

}
```

Any code that's written inside the `{ }` is part of the `main` function and will
start executing when the program is ran.

## C Libraries

In the earlier examples, we had to write the following code to get everything
working.

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <cs50.h>
```

These are known as header files that tells the compiler to load the library
to use the functionality that it provides. Header files are basically like a
menu of functions that a library has that we can use in our program.

The `printf()` function is part of the `stdio` library and to use `printf` we
need to include the library `stdio`, otherwise the compiler would have no idea
what `printf` is and just error out.

Similarly, the `cs50` library is needed to use things like `string` and
`get_string` which were written by other people for us to use.

The CS50 Library comes with a few functions, some of which are as follows.

-   `get_char`
-   `get_double`
-   `get_float`
-   `get_int`
-   `get_long`
-   `get_string`

## C Data Types

In C, every value has a `data type`. Some of those data types are as follows.

-   `bool`
-   `char`
-   `string` (CS50 Data Type)
-   `int`
-   `bigint`
-   `float`
-   `long`
-   `double`

## C Format Codes

In C, we can format a string with the following codes. These codes act as a
placeholder for us to plug the values in later on.

-   `%c` - char
-   `%f` - float, double
-   `%i` - int
-   `%li` - long
-   `%s` - string

## C Operators

C can perform various operations and the following allows us to do so.

-   `+` - Addition
-   `-` - Subtraction
-   `*` - Multiplication
-   `/` - Division
-   `%` - Remainder

We can set the variable `counter` to an integer value of `0` as follows.

```c
int counter = 0;
```

Now, to increase / increment the value of `counter` by `1` we can do as follows.

> NOTE: While setting the value of a variable that's already been declared,
> there's no need to add the data type at the beginning since the program
> already knows what type the data is.

```c
counter = counter + 1;
```

Here, the value of `counter` is being incremented by `1` in the right side of
the `=` and then the value is _assigned_ back to the variable `counter`.

The same thing can be achieved in a more clean way with the following syntax.

```c
counter += 1;
```

This increases the value of `counter` by `1` but, we can increment the value
by any number we want by replacing `1` with the value of our choice.

We can use `-=`, `*=`, `/=` and `%=` to decrease, multiply, divide or find the
remainder by our number of choice as well.

Since incrementing or decrementing a value is so common, it has an even shorter
way of doing it.

```c
counter++;
```

This will increment the value of `counter` by `1`. We can use `--` to decrement
the value by `1` too.

## C Comments

Comments are text for humans to read. The program ignores any comments in the
code, that is it won't execute anything that's regarded as a comment. It can
be used to keep notes of what something is or even to remind a programmer to do
something later on.

In C, comments are written with `//` as follows.

```c
// Get the value of x from user.
int x = get_int("x: ");
```

The compiler will ignore the comment starting with `//` and run the lines after
it.

## Integer Overflow

We're going to try and implement a simple calculator in C. To get started, we
need to first write the so called _boilerplate_ code.

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <cs50.h>

int main(void)
{

}
```

Now, inside the main function, we can take two variables `x` and `y`. Then, we
can set the values of `x` and `y` to be an integer of whatever the user inputs.

```c
int x = get_int("x: ");
int y = get_int("y: ");
```

We can then print the sum of `x` and `y` to the console.

```c
printf("%i\n", x + y);
```

To improve the design of the program a bit (could be subjective), we can first
put the sum of `x` and `y` in a new variable called `z` and then print that as
the output.

```c
int z = x + y;
printf("%i\n", z);
```

The ultimate program should look something like the following.

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <cs50.h>

int main(void)
{
    // Prompt user for value of x.
    int x = get_int("x: ");
    // Prompt user for value of y.
    int y = get_int("y: ");

    // Sum x + y.
    int z = x + y;

    printf("%i\n", z);
}
```

Now, we can add numbers together without issues. What if we were to try it with
some large numbers, for example in the billions.

Let's set the value of `x` to `1,000,000,000` and `y` to `1,000,000,000`. We
should get the result of `2,000,000,000`.

Whereas, if we try to add`2,000,000,000` and `2,000,000,000` together, the
result is going to be `-294967296` which is not what we expected.

This happened because the data types that we use to declare the variables be it
`int`, `float`, `double`, etc. use a finite number of bits to hold the data.
So, if a number is provided that exceeds the number of bits the variable can
hold, it has to drop some of the data since it can't hold any more.

In the above example, `int z` can hold a value of **32 bits** which is about
`2,147,483,647` (in positive value). The sum of `x` and `y` exceeds that number
and thus we get the inaccurate result.

> NOTE: a 32 bit variable can count up to `4,294,967,295` but, since it is also
> used to represent negative numbers, the first bit is used as the indicator for
> negativity.

We can modify our calculator so that we can solve this current problem by
changing the data type of `x` and `y` from an `int` to a `long`.

```c
long x = get_long("x: ");
long y = get_long("y: ");

long z = x + y;

printf("%li\n", z);
```

If we were to try and add `2,000,000,000` and `2,000,000,000` we would get our
expected result of `4,000,000,000`. We can do this because `long` uses
**64 bits** to hold its values and that gives us a higher number to count to
than the 32 bits that an `int` would hold.

This isn't a true fix to our problem since, even a 64 bit variable will
eventually reach it's limit. Even though it's a really big value, its still
finite. So, in reality, this calculator is only good for values that are in the
billions so to speak.

Let's try and make a program that divides two numbers. We can just use `floats`
as the data types and change the `+` operator to `/`.

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <cs50.h>

int main(void)
{
    // Prompt user for value of x.
    float x = get_float("x: ");
    // Prompt user for value of y.
    float y = get_float("y: ");

    // Divide x by y.
    float z = x + y;

    printf("%f\n", z);
}
```

> NOTE: We can use `%.2f` to print the first 2 decimal places of a `float`.

If we were to print the value of `%.50f` of division of 2 / 3, we would see
that after a certain number of digits, the reset are `0`. The reason this
happens is quite similar to what happened when we tried to add too large of a
number (for 32 bits) with another.

When there aren't enough bits to calculate accurately, the program just
approximates the value of the calculation and thus we get the weird looking
result.

> NOTE: **This is also known as floating point imprecision.** This refers to the
> inability of computers fundamentally to represent all possible real numbers
> 100% precisely (by default).

If we were to use `int` instead of `float` for `x` and `y`, we would see that
the value of `z` is going to be the integral of the division and the rest of the
digits after the decimal are all 0s. This happens because dividing an `int` by
another `int` will only return an `int` value as the result.

> NOTE: This is a feature of C known as **truncation**.

This is going to be the same if we store a `float` inside an `int`. We'll see
that just the integral of the float is stored and everything after the decimal
point is dropped.

We can get around this problem using something called **type conversion** and
convert the data type of a value.

Casting the `int y;` to a float can be done with `(float) y`. We don't need to
cast the value of `x` to a float because the division between an `int` and a
`float` is going to return a `float` anyways.

The reason **integer overflow** occurs is when you try to increase the value,
there isn't another bit to store that value. Let's say we have the bits `111`.
If we were to add `1` to is, the result would be `1000`. Since, we don't have a
4th bit, the value is just going to be `000`. This is essentially what integer
overflow is.

> Check out the original video's section explaining consequences of integer
> overflow [here](https://youtu.be/Na2wiHOnzXU?t=8419).

Let's build another program that converts Dollars to Pennies.

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <cs50.h>

int main(void)
{
    float amount = get_float("Dollar Amount: ");

    int pennies = amount * 100;
    printf("Pennies: %i\n", pennies);
}
```

If we enter `4.20` as the amount, we get `419` as the answer. This is another
example of that floating point imprecision. To fix this, we can round up this
number to the next integer using the `round()` function in the `math` library.

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <math.h>
#include <cs50.h>

int main(void)
{
    float amount = get_float("Dollar Amount: ");

    int pennies = round(amount * 100);
    printf("Pennies: %i\n", pennies);
}
```

## C Conditionals

We can run a block of code only if a condition holds true. These are called
conditional statements. In C it is done as follows.

```c
if (x > y)
{
    printf("x is greater than y.");
}
```

Here, `if` might look like a function as it's followed by a pair of `()`. In
this case, `if` is a programming construct that evaluates a boolean expression.

We can have an `else` block to run code that will execute if the boolean
expression is false.

```c
if (x > y)
{
    printf("x is greater than y.");
}
else
{
    printf("x is not greater than y.");
}
```

In C, it's not necessary to add the `{}` if the following code is just one line.
So, we could write the same thing in a shorter manner.

```c
if (x > y) printf("x is greater than y.");
else printf("x is not greater than y.");
```

Still, for _best practices_ we should use the `{}` whenever we can.

We can have an `else if` to check for a different condition to check and run
the block of code before resorting to an `else` statement.

```c
if (x > y)
{
    printf("x is greater than y.");
}
else if (x < y)
{
    printf("x is less than y.");
}
else if (x == y)
{
    printf("x is equal to y.");
}
```

Even though this code is correct, it's not well designed. Since the first two
conditions check if `x` is greater than or less than `y`, if both of them were
to be false, the only possible conclusion is going to be that `x` is equal to
`y`. Henceforth, the last `else if` block is unnecessary and should be replaced
with just an `else`.

### Integer Comparison

Let's write a program that compares the points of two people.

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <cs50.h>

int main(void)
{
    int points = get_int("How many points did you lose? ");

    if (points < 2)
    {
        printf("You lost fewer points than me.\n");
    } else if (points > 2)
    {
        printf("You lost more points than me.\n");
    } else
    {
        printf("You lost exactly as many points as me.\n");
    }
}
```

Here, we're checking whether the user has received more, less or equal points as
us. Although this code works, it's still not well designed.

The value `2` points is redundant and is not easily modifiable. Instead, of hard
coding the value of `2` we could use a variable of `mine` which will give a much
better understanding of why the value is `2` why is it being evaluated.

So, a better design of the same code will be as follows.

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <cs50.h>

int main(void)
{
    int mine = 2;
    int points = get_int("How many points did you lose? ");

    if (points < mine)
    {
        printf("You lost fewer points than me.\n");
    } else if (points > mine)
    {
        printf("You lost more points than me.\n");
    } else
    {
        printf("You lost exactly as many points as me.\n");
    }
}
```

If we wanted the value of `mine` to never change, we can add `const` in front
of it while declaring the variable to make it a constant.

```c
const int MINE = 2;
```

> NOTE: It's common to name constant values in SCREAMING_CASE.

### Even or Odd Comparison

Let's try making another program that tells us if a value is even or odd. Since
this might be a complex problem to solve, we can write the pseudo code for it as
a first step.

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <cs50.h>

int main(void)
{
    int n = get_int("n: ");

    // If n is even.
    if () {
        printf("n is even.\n");
    }
    // In n is odd.
    else {
        printf("n is odd.\n");
    }
}
```

We know that if the remainder of a number when divided by `2` is `0` then it's
even and when it's `1` it's odd. Now, we can turn that into code as follows.

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <cs50.h>

int main(void)
{
    int n = get_int("n: ");

    // If n is even.
    if (n % 2 == 0) {
        printf("n is even.\n");
    }
    // In n is odd.
    else {
        printf("n is odd.\n");
    }
}
```

### Yes or No Comparison

How about we make a program that takes a yes or no input.

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <cs50.h>

int main(void)
{
    // Prompt user to agree.
    char c = get_char("Do you agree? ");

    // Check whether the user agreed.
    if (c == 'y')
    {
        printf("You agreed.\n");
    } else if (c == 'n')
    {
        printf("You disagreed.\n");
    }
}
```

The program here has a bug, that is it's not going to work for capital inputs
like `Y` and `N`. To fix it, we can add the `||` (logical or) to check if the
value of `c` is either `y` or `Y` and execute the program.

```c
if (c == 'Y' || c == 'y')
{
    printf("You agreed.\n");
} else if (c == 'N' || c == 'n')
{
    printf("You disagreed.\n");
}
```

> NOTE: The `&&` (logical and) can be used to check if both sides of the
> expression are true or not.

> NOTE: The values of `y` and `n` are typed in `''` because `char` is a single
> character and its values need to be typed within `''` whereas `string` is
> multiple characters and its values needs to be inside `""`.

## C Loops

Looping is doing the same task multiple times. Let's say we want to print
something multiple times. One way to do it would be to do as follows.

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main(void) {
    printf("Meow!\n");
    printf("Meow!\n");
    printf("Meow!\n");
}
```

This code is going to print `Meow!` 4 times to the console. Even though it works
this code is not well designed. We can achieve similar results using loops.

If we want to keep running the same thing forever in C, we can do as follows
using a `while` loop.

```c
while (true)
{
    printf("Meow!\n");
}
```

This code will run as long as the boolean expression within the `()` remains
true. Instead of writing `1 == 1` we can just write `true` to make it clear
that we want to run this forever.

> NOTE: In C, `true` and `false` literally mean true and false. Those are the
> values boolean expressions return. `1` would be considered true in a boolean
> expression whereas `0` would be false.

Problem with the above code is, it will run forever. If we want to run a block a
finite number of times, we can use a counter that we increment and stop the loop
once we've done it the required number of times.

```c
int counter = 0;

while (counter < 3)
{
    printf("Meow!\n");
    counter++;
}
```

> NOTE: A `while` loop will check the condition first and then run the block of
> code. A similar loop is a `do while` loop. The difference here is, it will run
> the block at least once before checking the condition, and if the condition
> holds true, it will run again.

> NOTE: We can replace `counter` with `i` since it's a convention to use `i`,
> `j`, `k`, etc. for variables that are used for keeping track of a loop.

> NOTE: It's also a convention to start counting from 0.

This will print `Meow!` 4 times and then stop since the condition of `counter`
being less than 3 doesn't hold true.

Since it's so common to repeat something a finite number of times, there are
`for` loops that repeats a block _for_ a definite number of times.

```c
for (int i = 0; i < 3; i++)
{
    printf("Meow!\n");
}
```

## C Functions

Functions are reusable blocks of code. We need to first declare a function and
then call it to run the block of code inside. To write a function in C we do as
follows.

```c
void meow(void)
{
    printf("Meow!\n");
}
```

We can now use the `for` loop as before to run `meow()` as many times we want.

```c
for (int i = 0; i < 3; i++)
{
    meow();
}
```

> NOTE: We can omit the `{}` similarly to `if` statements when there's just one
> line of code to run in a `for` loop.

> NOTE: The `meow` function needs to be declared before calling it otherwise
> there will be errors. We can avoid that by adding the declaration at the top.
> It is also called a prototype.

```c
void main(void);

int main(void)
{
    meow();
}

void meow(void)
{
    printf("Meow!\n");
}
```

We can now add the functionality to repeat `meow` a number of times provided
by the user. Functions can take inputs / arguments.

```c
void main(int n);

int main(void)
{
    meow(3);
}

void meow(void)
{
    for (int i = 0; i < n; i++)
    {
        printf("Meow!\n");
    }
}
```

### Function Return Values

If we want a function to return a value after performing some tasks, we can do
so by the `return` keyword in C. Let's write a program that returns the
discount price on some products.

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <cs50.h>

int main(void)
{
    float regular = get_float("Regular Price: ");
    float sale = regular * 0.85;

    printf("Sale Price: %.2f\n", sale);
}
```

We can now modularize the code by implementing a `discount` function.

```c
float discount(float price);

int main(void)
{
    float regular = get_float("Regular Price: ");
    float sale = discount(regular);

    printf("Sale Price: %.2f\n", sale);
}

float discount(float price)
{
    float sale = price * 0.85;

    return sale;
}
```

> NOTE: We can also directly return the value of the expression `price * 0.85`.

Functions can take multiple arguments. So, we can also take in the percentage
of discount as well.

```c
float discount(float price, int percentage);

int main(void)
{
    float regular = get_float("Regular Price: ");
    int percent_off = get_int("Percent Off: ");

    float sale = discount(regular, percent_off);

    printf("Sale Price: %.2f\n", sale);
}

float discount(float price, int percentage)
{
    float sale = price * (100 - percentage) / 100;

    return sale;
}
```

## Nested Loops

Let's say we want to print a grid of `#` also called **ASCII Art**. We can do so
using nested loops in C.

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main(void)
{
    for (int i = 0; i < 4; i++)
    {
        printf("?");
    }
    printf("\n");
}
```

This is going to print a line of 4 `?` or if we add a variable, `n` number
of `?` in the console.

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <cs50.h>

int main(void)
{
    int n;
    do
    {
        n = get_int("Width: ");
    } while (n < 1);

    for (int i = 0; i < n; i++)
    {
        printf("?");
    }
    printf("\n");
}
```

> NOTE: Alternative to the `do while` loop we could implement the same
> functionality as follows.
>
> ```c
> while (true)
> {
>     n = get_int("Width: ");
>     if (n > 0) {
>         break;
>     }
> }
> ```

This program is capable of printing `?` in one axis. We can implement a function
to print it in both axes.

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <cs50.h>

int main(void)
{
    int n;
    do
    {
        n = get_int("Size: ");
    } while (n < 1);

    // For each row.
    for (int i = 0; i < n; i++)
    {
        // For each column.
        for (int j = 0; j < n; j++)
        {
            // Print a '#'.
            printf("#");
        }
        // Move to next row.
        printf("\n");
    }
}
```

# Resources

-   [Week 1](https://cs50.harvard.edu/x/2022/weeks/1/)
-   [Lecture 1](https://video.cs50.io/Na2wiHOnzXU?screen=sqgyiZCQ6Y8&start=0)
-   [Lecture 1 Notes](https://cs50.harvard.edu/x/2022/notes/1/)
-   [Lecture 1 Slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1mRIN6EDK92NJJlazpFfBNKhxrAQUUxJOJW0UH7knS0g/edit#slide=id.gee4e5a99f9_0_0)
-   [Problem Set 1](https://cs50.harvard.edu/x/2022/psets/1/)
